This research study deals with over-connectedness at work, a major issue in the 21st century in the Western world and investigates its evolution in the light of the global crisis of COVID19. Indeed, the health crisis has had a very significant impact on working modes for all companies around the world, particularly by forcing them to switch to home office. More specifically, this study sought to demonstrate a link between the use of the professional communication technologies available today in the corporate world and employees' creativity at work. The aim was to demonstrate through a quantitative analysis and through the collection of insights from interviews that the communication platforms and business phones that are often made available to employees could affect their proactivity and their ability to develop innovative ideas. This study could help companies understand the backlash of using these technologies outside of traditional work hours and raise their awareness on the importance of detachment from work, not only for employees to have more equilibrated lives but also for employers to be more competitive thanks to their workforce’s creativity.  

In a world of constant change and rapid digitalization, companies are benefiting of more and more opportunities that allow them to modernize and digitize their work methods, and to follow the trends to remain competitive on their market. This is notably the case of digital work tools that allow employees greater work flexibility and productivity by eliminating repetitive and non-value-added tasks that they used to have to perform. Indeed, digital work tools allow to focus on the core business of each worker and allows them to demonstrate unprecedented efficiency.  
Communication technologies, which are digital tools allowing optimal communication between employees, are an example of these evolutions that have become essential in companies. If communication in companies relied essentially on emails or phone calls for many years, the opportunities have become much wider with the emergence of instant communication platforms traditionally used in a personal setting, which have been transposed to the workplace for professional communication. Corporate communication as it is today allows a constant communication from one employee to another, and from a manager to an employee. Moreover, it allows employees to be connected to their company from anywhere in the world, which has led to a greater use of remote work. 
However, while these technologies have allowed employees to stay more connected during work hours, they have also allowed them to stay connected outside of work hours (Diaz et al., 2012). Despite the benefits to both companies and employees, communication technologies encourage employees to bring professional tasks outside of the space where they normally work (Diaz et al., 2012). These technologies can lead to a feeling of being trapped for employees, of being constantly attached to work, which some researchers refer to as an "electronic leash" that ties employees to their employer and prevents them from detaching from their work (Boswell & Olson-Buchanan, 2007).  
In response to these risks, France has made the right to disconnect legal since July 21, 2016 with a law called “Loi Travail”. Indeed, with rapid digital developments and constantly changing work patterns, it was necessary to adapt labor laws to the digital age in order avoid an overflow in the use of digital work tools, and especially communication technologies.     
However, with the onset of the health crisis and the generalization of remote work 
 
to almost all employees, the progress made on the right to disconnect was undermined and the risks that professional communication technologies could generate became all the more important. As a result, the issues of the right to disconnect have once again been put on the table. Indeed, the risks of over-connection at work are now numerous, and among them are the psycho-social risks, which are. risks for the mental health of employees that can lead to depression or burn-out (Boswell & Olson-Buchanan, 2007). More generally, the constant connection to work can cause significant stress to employees who not only feel that they must always be present for the employer, even during their off hours, but also feel a conflict between their professional and personal lives that they will find difficult to manage (Boswell & Olson-Buchanan, 2007; Perlow, 2012).  
As previous research has shown, stress can have a negative impact on employees' personal lives, but it can also have a significant impact on their professional lives, particularly on the creativity side (Liu & Liu, 2020). Creativity at work is necessary for business competitiveness and is defined as "the production of new and useful ideas" (Amabile et al., 1996). Creativity is often seen as a driver for problem solving and innovation, which will allow companies to gain a sustained competitive advantage on their market (Bouty & Gomez, 2015). That is why it is important for companies to perform an effective stress management, whether it is due to the constant connection to work or other reasons.  
Thus, this research will study the link between the use of communication technologies (CT) outside of work hours, and the creativity of employees through a variable that links them: stress. Indeed, a constant use of CT by employees will generate stress, and stress negatively affects creativity. The aim is therefore to investigate, through a qualitative study, how CT can generate stress and affect the creativity of workers. 
This research will allow companies and managers to better understand the use of communication technologies and to understand their limits. Indeed, in order to preserve the creativity of their employees, companies could be able to adjust their use of communication technologies, especially outside of work hours. They will also be able to better understand why some employees may have experienced a decrease in creativity at work during the health crisis and adjust accordingly. Finally, it could more generally allow to bring to previous research a new eye on the problems of connection to work and creativity in a context of health crisis, which changed the situation and moved the cursors of each of the studied variables. 
This paper will be organized as so:  
Chapter 1: Introduction  
The introduction seeks to present the subject, the main variables that will be studied throughout the whole research. The goal of this section is also to present the current challenges that create a need for more research on that subject, and the related news, particularly in terms of COVID19.  
Chapter 2: Literature Review  
The literature review will present the theories of detachment from work, professional communication technologies and creativity at work. It will first establish the theoretical framework within which human resource management and creativity are embedded, and then present past research on each of the topics discussed. 
Chapter 3: Problem Formulation 
This section will present the main research question, the hypotheses to test throughout the research and the initial framework of the relationship between the variables studied. It will then introduce the three sub-questions to be researched in relation to the hypotheses. 
Chapter 4: Methodology  
This section will present the research methods chosen for this study. First, the research design will be introduced, then the way data was collected will be explained, and finally, the way the data was analyzed will be presented.  
Chapter 5: Analysis  
In this section, the analysis of the data carried out will be explicated. Three types of analysis will be executed: a vertical analysis, a horizontal analysis and finally a statistical analysis with the software IraMuTeq.  
Chapter 6: Discussion  
In this section, the results from the analyses produced in the previous section will be presented, providing an answer for each of the research’s sub-questions, and validating or not the initial hypotheses and research framework. Finally, the limitations of this study will be listed.  
Chapter 7: Conclusion  
In this final section, a brief summary of the insights gained from this study will be presented, and then the need for future research to complete the subject studied will be argued about. 


According to resource-based view researcher such as Barney (1991), a company can achieve a sustain competitive advantage on its market by possessing a certain type of resources. Indeed, on a fiercely competitive market, it is paramount for a company to stand out and gain advantages over its competitors, or it will not survive. Traditionally, scholars have believed that those advantages could be gain thanks to the value proposition of a company, which corresponds to the products or services that it proposes to its clients. However, resource-based view theories have turned this vision on its head: it is only possible for a company to create competitive products and services in its market if it has the resources to do so. Hence, according to Barney (1991), resources that are rare, valuable and difficult to imitate will provide the firm with a competitive advantage over its competitors (Barney, 1991).  

The self-determination theory (SDT) has been elaborated by Deci and Ryan in 1975 and has gone through many revisions over the years. This theory seeks to explain on what degree level humans’ behaviors are self-motivated and self-determined. It therefore studies the sources of human motivation in terms of self-determinism and in terms of punishment and reward systems (Deci & Ryan, 1980). Hence motivation is the key element which is researched by this theory, and it provides with more insights than the traditional paradigm on how motivation should be approached. Indeed, traditional approaches considered that every individual had more or less motivation in themselves. Motivation was therefore treated as a unidimensional resource. Contrary to this belief, SDT differentiates various types of motivation which are characterized by various drivers or motivational forces which will influence the behavior of an individual (Rigby & Ryan, 2018).  
Indeed, according to Deci and Ryan’s early studies, there are two types of motivation which can be differentiated: an intrinsic motivation and an extrinsic motivation. Intrinsic motivation is defined as doing something for its own sake (Deci & Ryan, 1994, 2010). On the contrary, extrinsic motivation is defined as the pursuit of an instrumental goal, meaning the pursuit of a reward and the avoidance of a punishment. Deci and Ryan believe that extrinsic incentives undermine the intrinsic motivation. Indeed, when one does something for pleasure, once they get paid for it, they will enjoy less and less doing it without a financial reward in return. Another difference between those two types of motivation is that the extrinsic one fulfills biological needs, such as while intrinsic motivation fulfills the needs of the mind (Deci & Ryan, 2010). 
The intrinsic-extrinsic motivation balance is believed by scholars to be the key to better the relationship between incentives and performance. Kuuvas et al. focused their research on extrinsic motivation and found out that in terms of employee well-being and performance, intrinsic motivation would lead to much better outcomes than extrinsic motivation would (Kuvaas et al., 2017). According to them, companies should focus on increasing the intrinsic motivation, as increasing the extrinsic motivation is not an advantage for neither the company nor the workers. Indeed, they found out that intrinsic motivation would end up in positive results both in terms of performance and affective organizational commitment, while extrinsic motivation was associated with negative outcomes such as continuance commitment, turnover intentions, or workfamily conflicts (Kuvaas et al., 2017). However, on the short term, extrinsic motivation can still influence positively the performance of an employee.  

One of the main elements of this research will be work-life balance. Work-life balance, also known as work-family balance, is defined as work life and family life being in balance. A good balance between work and family would be a lack of conflicts or interference between work and family roles (Frone, 2003). However, in literature, work-family balance is more generally defined as “a form of interpole conflict in which the role pressures from the work and family domains are mutually incompatible in some respect. That is, participation in the work (family) role is made more difficult by virtue of participation in the family (work) role. “ (Greenhaus & Beutell, 1985). 
Flexible working arrangements were initially designed with a view to reducing the work-life conflicts and allow employees to have a family life beside their work. Some arrangement can indeed be very beneficial for employees such as working in flexible or part-time (Russell et al., 2009). However, according to Russel et al., working from home is associated with greater levels of both work pressure and work–life conflict. Their study showed that employees who were involved in home office experienced higher levels of work pressure and work-life conflict (Russell et al., 2009). This observation may be caused by the breaking down of boundaries between work and home, where work will spill over into family time. This study also showed that off-duty hours of work are not the only factor explaining this, as employees who respect their work hours will still experience work pressure and work-life conflicts (Russell et al., 2009). 
Although there are many variables which can influence the relationship between work hours and health such as the gender, the age or the job, there is a correlation between overall health symptoms and hours of work according to a study conducted by Sparks et al. Those symptoms can be physiologic or psychologic (Sparks et al., 2018). Between the physiological symptoms, heart diseases were the most correlated symptom whereas among the psychological symptoms, stress was mentioned often. It is therefore important for HR practitioners to monitor the hours of work performed by employees to avoid any risks (Sparks et al., 2018). 
 
2.3.2 Benefits of psychological detachment from work 
 
Detachment from work refers to the state in which an employee mentally disconnects from their work and do not think anymore about work-related issues (Sabine Sonnentag, 2012). Work can be a major source of stress for an individual. If it is commonly believed in organizations that being constantly preoccupied with jobrelated issues can be a driver for performance, it can actually induce many negative side effects for employees (Sabine Sonnentag, 2012). On the contrary, many empirical studies have shown that detachment from work during off-hours is beneficial for employees’ wellbeing but also for their performance on the job (Sonnentag, 2012).  
According to Moreno-Jiménez et al., employees who are more detached outside of work hours will feel more satisfied with their life, and will experience lower levels of psychological strain symptoms such as poor sleep (Moreno-Jiménez et al., 2009) The benefits of work detachment can be observable on the short-term as well as the longer term. Indeed, a study based on employees’ daily diaries showed that they felt more rested and cheerful in the morning when they had been disconnecting from work since the evening before (Moreno-Jiménez et al., 2009; Sabine Sonnentag, 2012). Those studies implied as well that employees could return to work in a more positive mindset in the morning than if they had been thinking about work-issues all night. Hence, a more favorable affective state helped them perform better during the work day (Rothbard & Wilk, 2011).  


There are several hypotheses that flow from this framework, and which will be researched and validated or refuted:  
H1: The use of professional CT outside of working hours can induce stress for employees  
•	H1.1: The use of business cell phone outside working hours can induce stress for employees, especially during COVID19 
•	H1.2: the use of communication platforms outside working hours can induce stress for employees, especially during COVID19 
H2: Stress negatively impacts employees' creativity 
•	H2.1: Stress negatively impacts employees' ability to be proactive 
•	H2.2: Stress reduces the ability of employees to come up with innovative ideas when facing problems  
H3: The use of professional CT outside working hours has a negative impact on employees' creativity  
There are therefore 3 sub questions that are to be answered in this paper, regarding the 3 major hypotheses:  
1)	Does the use of CT outside of work hours induce stress for employees, especially during the sanitary crisis?  
This sub-question will focus on studying the use of the professional cell phone and of and of communication platforms outside of work hours, and their effect on the appearance of stress symptoms for employees. The goal is to validate H1. This subquestion will be answered thanks to the literature review and the data analysis.  
2)	What is the impact of this stress on employees’ creativity?  
This sub-question aims to capture how creativity can be enhanced or decreased by job stressors, and particularly when they originate from constant connectivity to work. More precisely, it seeks to establish a relationship between stress and the proactivity of employees, and between stress and their ability to propose innovative solutions when facing problems. The goal is to observe how stress at work in general can influence creativity, and to validate H2. This sub-question will be answered thanks to the literature review and the data analysis.  
3)	What impact does the use of communication technologies outside of work hours have on employees’ creativity?  
Finally, the goal of this sub-question is to establish a direct link between the use of communication technologies, especially the professional cell phone and the communication platforms, and creativity which is characterized by proactivity and the ability to answer work problems with innovative ideas. If a negative relationship is found out in response to this question, H3 will be validated. This sub-question will be answered essentially thanks to the data analysis. 


For this part of the statistical analysis, terms corresponding to the lemma of the communication technologies were selected, as well as terms corresponding to the lemma of stress. This reduced list of words all belonging to the lemma of CT and stress could allow to establish the links between those two lemmas in the discussion with the respondents, and therefore to understand how they would articulate those two variables together, thanks to the realization of a similarity analysis plotted as a similarity tree. It is important to note that in order to establish this link, the IraMuTeq software analyzed the interviews as a whole. 

Chapter VII Conclusion 
This section will present first the managerial implications of this study, and will then conclude on the insights gained by in and on possibilities of future research to deepen the understanding of the phenomenon studied. 
7.1 Managerial implications 
This research seeks to raise awareness of companies that working hours is a matter worth being thought about. Not respecting a balance between work and rest can be very significant implications, as this research and previous research have found. Indeed, if companies are not careful enough with work hours and the right to disconnect from work, they are exposing their employees to many risks. Firstly, stress is a very common risk when employees work more than their standard workdays and communicate about professional matters even outside of work hours. If it is often quite well understood by firms that the fact of executing professional tasks during rest hours can be dangerous for work-life balance and the employees’ mental health, some employers continue to believe that communicating outside of work hours should not be considered as the continuity of the professional activity and is not that tiring for employees. This believe is inaccurate and that is the vice of communication technologies. In a world where everyone is connected to their peers, it seems very natural to be answering messages, emails or phone calls at all times, even when they are related to work. However, there is a big difference between communicating for personal matters and communicating for professional purposes. Communicating is working when it comes to work related issues, and employees who are always working risk developing serious mental health problems such as burnout or depression. Companies need to be aware of it so that they do not normalize the fact of employees being connected to work 24 hours a day. Employees are not supposed to answer emails during their holidays, even though there is an emergency to be fixed. It is paramount for top managers to evaluate the balance between solving a small emergency now and be at peace for a while until bigger problems concerning the mental health of employees happen, and delaying the resolution of the problems to one or two weeks before the employee comes back from holidays and not putting them at risk to develop a mental disease.  
In addition, when it comes to creativity, companies gain a lot from the rest and mental sanity of their employees. Indeed, as proven in this research, being rested and mentally healthy is what allows employees to be performant, productive, and to develop creative ideas. Some individuals even believe that their creative ideas come to them during the time they rest and unplug their brain from work. Companies need the creativity of their employees because it is what will allow them to stand out compared to their competitors, and to always stay ahead of tendencies on their market. A company can spend a lot of money hiring talents and rare profiles in order to become more performant, but there is no point in doing that if employees are overworked and can no longer put all their intellectual capacities at the service of the company. Hence, it is a win-win situation to have rested and relaxed employees instead of a stressed workforce that will not be efficient for long.  
Another issue is that most individuals are not able to keep up with the rhythm of work in company which have “24 hours of work a day” policy. In those companies, employees might be able to resist and still stay efficient on the short run, but on the longer run they will stop being performant or will simply leave. In any case, the company will lose a lot of money because unperforming employees cost more money than they make, and employees who leave force the company to engage more expenses to recruit replacements. 
In order to avoid those issues, companies need to abolish the culture of immediacy. Setting employees to rest at night is not on waste of time and money, on the contrary it will make them even more efficient the next day. Managers should stop requiring an immediate answer every time they send a message, and employees should not be made to feel guilty because they disconnected earlier. It is paramount for companies to respect the work-life balance of their workers and to set up HR policies that are suitable for that. Of course, there are jobs that justify the fact for employees to be always connected to their work, as it was the case in this research for one of the respondents. It is especially the case for employees who have to be on call for some of their clients. In this situation, companies have no other choice than to let the employee be solicited permanently, but they still can have an action on the preventing psycho-social risks to appear. For example, they can set up a special follow-up of these employees to make sure that they are not on the edge of burnout, and that their job does not interfere too much with their family life. This way, if an employee does no longer find their job compatible with they private life, the company can arrange a new career path for them. 
Furthermore, companies can set up processes to avoid professional communication outside of work hours. Changing the culture of the company is one thing, but there still might be some overflows because some employees have difficulties to disconnect from work. To avoid that, it is for example possible to install a software that calculates the hours that employees spent connected to the company’s communication platform and that alert employees when they have been working too much outside of they standard work hours. Besides that, this research highlights the need for companies to train both employees and managers to work-life conflicts matters and to the importance of resting between two workdays. Managers should not send messages during rest hours to their employees and expect an immediate response, just like employees should not check their emails and answer them during their holidays. If some workers feel anxious to leave a lot of emails unanswered while they are off, a good training could reassure them and make them understand that their mental health is the most important.  
Finally, this research showed that the COVID19 crisis had played a role in stressing the employees regarding the use of CT. Communicating through instant messaging is not similar to communicating in real life and there is no point for companies to overexploit instant messaging platforms when employees are doing home office in order to keep in touch. Companies need to adjust their policies regarding the use of CT during home office in a way that makes this use efficient and not invasive. This research can also alert companies to the fact that it is even more important to monitor the working hours of employees during home office, because the fact of working from home can sometimes blur the limits between the professional life and the personal life. Not spending time in transportations is not an argument to extend one’s working hours. On the contrary, hours spend in the transportations are not hours that employees spend working, so there is no reason for employers to expect their employees to keep working during these hours. 
 
7.2 Conclusion and need for future research 
 
To conclude on this research, the creativity of employees is impacted and undermined by an overuse of communication technologies, and especially outside of work hours. Instant messaging platforms are the main driver to this phenomenon, particularly because they usually come from notifications which are invading the lives of employees at any time. In consequence, individuals can observe that they are less productive at work and have difficulties developing innovative ideas to enhance the existing of their company. This research also highlighted that the personality of workers influences a lot their behavior towards communication technologies.  
In this research, the goal was mainly to observe the impact that constant connection to work through CT could have on the creativity of a sample of individuals, regardless of their age, their gender, or other characteristics that they might have. If the researcher has focused on selection respondents of various age, profession, and gender to have a sample with the less biases as possible, those characteristics of the interviewees were not taken into account for the analysis. Future studies could focus on researching the impact that the use of CT outside of work hours can have on creativity according for example to the gender, or to the age of the respondent. Indeed, men and women often do not have the same relationship to communication or to creativity, for cultural reasons. Therefore, it could be interesting to see how this factor could have an impact on the relationship shown in this research. Moreover, regarding the use of CT, young and senior professional do not have the same way of using them, which might affect the stress that those two populations can experience, and the impact that it could have on their creativity at work. Hence, future research could focus on studying the relationship between the use of CT and creativity according to age ranges.  
Finally, as previous research has shown, managers have a role to play in the constant connectivity of their employees, and a majority of them today do not hesitate to solicitate their subordinates even outside of work hours. In this research, the focus was mainly on studying the communications suffered by the respondents outside of work hours, and not on the communications that they might impose as well on their subordinates. Future research could focus on the role of managers and their mindset in terms of professional CT, to understand better how they perceive their utility, if they see an interest in limiting their solicitations to others, and if they manage to set their own limits.   
